Welcome back.
Let's talk about the idea of imperative vs. declarative.
What does that mean.
Well imperative code is code that tells the machine what to do and how to do it declarative code tells
it what to do and what should happen.
It doesn't tell the computer how to do things.
I'm still confused.
Well think of it this way a computer is better at being imperative.
That is it needs to know how to do things.
We on the other hand as humans are more declarative.
If I tell my friend hey can you pass me that jug of water.
Well I don't need to tell my friend hey can you walk over there with your right hand pick up the jug.
Come towards me.
Give it to me and then release the jug into my hand.
I don't have to tell it.
Humans are declared and if you remember when we talked about JavaScript engines you can see this example
here.
Machine code is very imperative we say put the variable in this memory space and then take it out here
and modify here.
It's very descriptive of how to do things versus as we go higher and higher up the chain to something
like a higher level language.
Well that becomes more declarative.
We don't have to say hey this is where you should store the memory.
We just declare variable with some sort of data and we say what we need to get done but not how to do
it.
The computer takes care of that for us.
Another great example of imperative versus declarative is the idea of for loops where we have four let
AI of let's say equals to zero.
And then we say AI is less than a thousand increment AI and then in here a console dot log.
Hi would you say that's imperative or declarative.
I mean it's all on a spectrum but this is pretty imperative.
Right.
We say declare variables zero and then loop for a thousand times and then also increment AI and console
log.
There's a lot of instruction here.
How can you make this more declarative.
Well I can simply say let's say we have an array of a thousand items and I can say for each for each
item in the array just console the old log the item so that if I do something like this I get one two
three you can see that this is a lot more declarative I don't tell the program what to do or how to
do it.
Simply.
Well here's an array for each array for and each item just console log the item.
I don't tell it to increment I by 1 and to loop through things.
This is more declarative than this one.
Another classic example of this is J query J.
Query is a lot more imperative than what we have now on the front and frameworks like react angular
or view because with J query we told our Web site exactly what to do.
Hey if the user clicks on the ACM L then grab the drop down menu and then hide it.
Hey if something happens with the drop down menu well then look at the sibling and then hide that we
tell it exactly what to do.
But also how to do it versus if you look at something like react and this is a project that we've worked
on.
On another one of my courses if I go to components and we look at card component for example react is
fairly imperative we have a function here that takes in some parameters and then returns a piece of
HMO.
We don't tell it what to display and how to do it just simply hate.
This is the data.
Can you just display this.
Even if we go into something like apt J Yes.
And if you've never seen react before don't get scared.
This is not important.
I just want to show you the idea behind it.
You see that I have an is pending and a loading and I'm simply saying Hey if is pending is the true.
Then just do a loading screen otherwise just load up the card list don't tell react how to do things.
I just tell it hey this is what I want.
This is more declarative why my teaching you this because functional programming helps us be more declarative
by using functions and what we'll learn eventually which is composing functions we tell our programs
what to do instead of how to do it.
Now I know that that's still hard to understand and we'll keep working on that understanding throughout
the next couple of videos but it's important here to remember that when we talk about declarative and
imperative declarative code is always going to end up either compiling down or being processed by something
imperative like machine code right.
At the end of the day we can't just avoid side effects and data manipulation right at the end of the
day something has to manipulate the DOM on a web page or talk to a database.
In the case of something like react yes it abstracts away a lot of this complexity so that we as programmers
don't have to do it but the react library itself and even functional languages like Lisp or Haskell
eventually have to compile and do imperative things.
But the idea is for us to go a step higher a level higher into declarative code so that it's easier
to read and we can be more productive.
So that is imperative versus declarative.
Let's move on to another important concept.